[Applause]
thank you oh yeah little die
welcome back to our little math theater
so you guys doing all right yeah okay so
last time last time we started to talk
about parametric curves and today we
will continue we will continue this
topic and we will learn where is various
important things about parametric curves
such as tangent lines arc length and
various areas of surfaces which are
obtained from parametric curves so the
first thing we will discuss today is
tangent lines and this is actually very
easy to introduce the topic is very easy
to introduce because this is something
familiar from single variable calculus
in single variable calculus
in single variable calculus we study
graphs of functions right and so a graph
of a function is something which we draw
on the plane which to coordinates x and
y and it looks something like this and
you'll be right y equals f of X right or
F is a function after the function one
variable so this is a graph which is a
graph of the function f of X so now
oftentimes oftentimes in mathematics or
in science and engineering you want to
know where its approximate results about
your object the object may be too
complicated and you want to get sort of
the first order approximation as they
say or it might be that just you want to
understand it qualitatively for example
let's say if this is the graph of the
temperature in Berkeley California where
X is a time so let's say over the last
week you know it actually would be more
likely than suppose very hot last
weekend right so then maybe you don't
want to know exactly what the graph
looks like what you want to know for
example the trends that's the
temperature increase does it decrease
things like that and for this it's very
useful to find some approximate tools
which would you know you'll be able to
say a lot of things about your object
without really you know getting hundred
percent of the information about it and
tangent lines is the first thing that
you you can use for that and the reason
is very simple
the reason is that out of all the curves
that you can draw out of all the curves
so this is what this is an example of a
curve but of course you can draw many
more very complicated
I mean circle and so on goes without
saying but even kind really wacky curves
you can draw anything you want them to
draw like a Picasso
you know it's also prime it's also curve
right oftentimes he oftentimes just do
it in one stroke so out of all of this
curve there's a whole variety of those
curves and very complicated but there is
a very simple class there is a class of
the simplest ones and those are the
lines the lines are the simple curves
okay
so lines now the simplest curves and the
equation of a line if a lines can be
graphs of functions and those functions
usually look like this it will be
something like K times X minus x0 plus
y0 where K is called the slope he is
called the slope and it's a line with
the slope K and also line which passes
through through the point x0 y0 all
right so let's let's draw let's draw it
actually say here so let's say this is X
0 y 0 on the plane and the line is going
to look something like this ok
so to draw a line what you need to know
is a point through which it passes and
also the slope what what do I mean by
the slope the slope is the tangent of
this angle so in other words you need to
know the angle between this line and the
x-axis that's this angle theta and the
tangent of this angle is called the
slope and that's what we call K in that
formula the slope of this line
so this is the simplest this is a simple
graph and the simplest curve really I
mean what could be simpler than this see
the point is you are considered on the
right hand side you have a function of X
and the simplest function of X that you
can write is a constant function and
then the next simplest function is a
constant function plus a linear function
which is what we've written but the
constant function could also be thought
of a special case of this namely if K is
equal to 0 slope 0 this will just
disappear and if you would have this so
in other words that the case of the
forms constant function is included
because you're allowed to have arbitrary
K so k equals 0 would give you the
constant function so that would be just
a special case of this when y equals y 0
it's a it's also line it's a horizontal
line it has slope 0 it's just a special
case of this in some sense there is no
point there is no point of
distinguishing this case from this get
more general case of lines so that's why
I'm saying that the simplest curves that
you can draw other lines because
dependence on X dependence of the
function f of X is the simplest possible
it only contains a constant term and the
linear term in X in other words degree 1
it doesn't have x squared then I have ax
cube not to mention you know logarithms
cosines and all those other complicate
functions okay
so that's the first fact which you have
to remember that out of all the curves
they're the simplest ones these are the
lines and we know the equations of the
lines they are given by this by this
formula and so the next thing the next
idea of calculus and we really the most
important idea maybe of all of calculus
is that for many many functions namely
the so-called smooth functions or
differentiable functions you can
approximate your function very well on a
small scale by by line or more precisely
approximate the graph of the function by
align two things two ways to think about
a small function can be approximated by
a linear function like this which
geometrically means that the graph can
be very nicely and usefully approximated
by a line
and in practice the way it works is that
if we pick a point on this curve and
let's call it again x0 and y0 then we
can we can think of a whole variety of
lines which pass through this point
there are many of them they're
infinitely many in fact instance many
lines but out of all of those lines
there will be one line which will be the
closest to this graph and that's the
tangent line you see so I forgot to
bring my color chalk again but I guess I
hope you get the idea so this is this is
the this is a tangent line and what's so
special about this is that it is the
closest one to the graph of the function
in the following sense that if if you
slightly if you move it just slightly it
will intersect it will intersect the
graph at two different points you know
if if we blow this up people this up is
going to look like this I just blow up a
very small neighborhood of this point
you're going to look like this if I
change it just change it just slightly
you know like this it's already
intersect it at two different points so
you just that you adjust you line just
so that it touches the graph at one
point that's intuitively what the
tangent line is tangent tangent line the
closest one the closest of all lines to
this graph to this crack at this
particular point
if you change your reference point of
course you're going to get a different
one in other words here I'm talking
about the tangent to this particular
point which is that point x0 y0 on the
big picture but if you go on to a
different place you go to different
place here for example of course you
will get an entirely different line so
when you talk about tangent line you
have to say tangent at which point it
otherwise it doesn't make any sense
each point on the graph has its own
tangent line and a priori they are all
different in the most in almost all
cases they will be different so this is
not to say that this line can replace
the graph of the function because you
see they diverge if you go sufficiently
far from this from this point they
become different
you know this expression going off on a
tangent yes sometimes you catch me doing
that I suppose anyone is capable of
doing that and what it means precisely
is that if you go off on a tangent
you will soon soon enough you'll be far
away from the object itself but the good
news is that as long as you are in a
very small neighborhood of this point
the difference is almost negligible and
this is the key idea of calculus really
and of course also single variable now
because we are talking now about
functions in one variable but you will
see that the same idea will be applied
very usefully also for multi variable
functions for example if you have
function two variables you will be
approximating graph by planes instead of
lines and so on okay so so I hope I
convinced you of importance of this
because what does it give what does it
give you for example you see that the
function is your function is increasing
at this point right if if the slope is
is positive like this right and the
function is decreasing if the slope is
negative so already you can learn a lot
of things about your function by
studying the tangent line
now the next next comes the question is
how to find the equation of the tangent
line we know that it's going to look
like this
right because because all lines look
like this more precisely all lines which
are graphs of functions they all look
like this so which one is it in other
words we have to find the coefficient K
and we have to find this number y 0 and
we have them find the number X 0 that's
what determines the line as we discussed
we need X 0 y 0 in the slope but we
already know X 0 and y 0 because that
there is the reference point that's the
point on the curve to which we look for
the tangent line so we already know know
X 0 and y 0 and the question is how to
find the slope of the tangent line K of
the tangent line and the answer was
given before in single variable calculus
and the answer is which is very nice or
one might say beautiful okay the answer
is K is equal to the derivative of this
function at the point of view in other
words you don't need to draw anything
you don't need to make any complicated
calculations all you need to know is the
derivative of your function and usually
your function is described in a very
explicit way like you know say but no no
function or cosine or sine or
exponential function for which you know
what the derivatives look like because
you learn them from you know by by by
calculating them once and then you make
a list and you remember them so so
taking derivative it's something which
which we we know well quite well right
so all you need to know to find the
slope is to find it derivative is to
know how to find the derivative and once
you know the derivative you know the
slope and so then you can put these
things together and you get the equation
of the tangent line so the final result
is that the equation of the file of the
of the tangent line
it's just obtained by combining all this
information right into this formula so
instead of K you will put f prime of X
zero which is wrote here right and then
you have X minus x0 plus y0 that's the
equation of this tangent line no matter
how complicated your function is the
equation of the tangent line is going to
always look like this now of course I am
cheating a little bit because all of
this is applicable to functions for
which the derivative exists in the first
place and not every function has a
derivative these are the so-called
differentiable functions but the
functions that we are going to study in
this course there are going to be
differentiable and so so this method
will apply so you have to realize that
this is something which works in some
sense for the nicely possible functions
namely differentiable functions or
smooth functions if you will the ones
for which the graph is sort of a smooth
curve as opposed to a curve which has
angles which has sharp angles because if
you have a sharp angle it's not clear
how to make a tangent line right it's
not it's not going to touch the graph
because there is a core there's a sharp
corner so this case we don't consider
don't consider the smooth ones but the
smooth the class of smooth functions is
law is very large and we are focusing on
its course on the smooth functions so
that so we are fine our method is
applicable here and once it is smooth it
has a derivative and so you can write
easily the equation of this line that's
what we've learned in single variable
calculus now in single variable calculus
you study graphs of functions in one
variable which are curves on the plane
and last week we talked about more
general curves we said okay there is a
there are many curves which you can get
and graphs of functions but not all
there are more general curves which are
not graphs of functions and there are
two ways to represent them one is by an
equation like X square plus y square
equals one like a circle radius one or
in a parametric form okay so that that
means that we have now a larger class of
curves
which includes but not is equal is not
equal is bigger than the class of graph
so now we'd like to ask the same
question about this parametric curves in
other words we want to learn how to
compute the tangent line to such a such
a curve at a given point so that's the
question that we are we are going to ask
[Applause]
so in other words now we have a
parametric curve parametric curve and
the parametric curve is given by a pair
of functions f of T and G of T as we
discussed last time right where T is an
absolutely variable the parameter on the
curve and we want to learn the equation
that what is it we want to find out what
is the tangent line to to this curve at
a given point
x0y0 we're of course for this point x0
y0 to belong to this to this curve both
of these values x0 and y0 have to be
values of F and G at a given parameter
value p0 right so that would have to be
f of T 0 and that would have to be wider
would have to be G of T 0 for some p0
some value we'll look at examples in a
bit so you'll see what I'm talking about
okay so what is the tangent line to this
curve in other words we would like to
extrapolate this formula with like the
generalize this formula which by the way
is the way mathematics is done you know
you you don't immediately get the answer
in all cases you make you work out the
simplest case and then you try to
generalize so if you look at this
formula it may be the answer may not be
so obvious because they hear this answer
involves this function f which you know
because we're talking about the graph of
a function which is really the special
case special case of the general
parameter curves in which the
parameterization is X equal T and Y is
equal to f of C which they showed you
right away how special this case is how
special well it's just that X is T and
and Y is some function because if you if
you have this parameter ization then the
first equation tells you that X is just
T so you can just substitute X instead
of T and you get y equals f of X you get
the graph of the function so in other
words in this special case the function
f F small F small is just the function T
and the function G small is another
function f catechol and now we have a
more general case where both are small
mg small are some complicate functions
which are not necessarily equal to T or
anything
anything given an advance so we need to
generalize this formula and it's not
obvious immediately what the answer
should be because it really appeals to
this particular case for this very
special case but it's actually not so
hard to get the answer to get the answer
we have to remember how we derive this
formula in a single variable cut off in
the first place
okay and actually for that I will use I
will use this picture so you see what is
the slope the slope is the ratio the
slope is the ratio of Delta Y Delta X
the increment in Y over increment in X
that's because that's how let's look at
the graph of the line and let's just
recall let's just recall the definition
of a tangent because remember KX okay
the tangent of the angle so water is
tangent tangent when you draw the
triangle is that is the ratio of the
change in Y in the triangle over the
change in X so so K is equal to Delta Y
over Delta on this line so for this
tangent line we we have the same the
same thing there is a Delta Y and if
there is Delta X now so this is Delta Y
over Delta X on the line on the tangent
line
but the point is that this is
approximately but this increment in Y
for very small on a very small scale is
almost equal to the increment in Y on
the graph itself and the change in X of
course is the same for both so you
should look at this picture and see that
even though the tangent line that goes
off on a tangent that they diverge a
little bit but not so much and the
closer you are to the point actually the
difference is less and less right so in
fact this ratio is almost the same as
Delta Y over Delta X but now on the
graph itself and so the slope can be
computed as the ratio of the increment
of the function Delta Y this one to the
increment in X right so in other words
this is Delta Y on on the tangent right
here's the Delta Y on the tangent and
this is Delta Y on the graph and they're
almost the same
so the slope for this computing the
slope we might as well take Delta Y of
the graph and divide it by Delta X and
when this becomes very small when Delta
X becomes smaller and smaller so you are
getting closer and closer to the point
this becomes what we call the derivative
dy/dx over DX which is in front so
that's the reason why where you actually
get the derivative because what you get
is dy over DX and Y is there for X so dy
DX is f Prime at your reference point at
here F 0 so that's how you derive this
formula in other words this this
calculation is what gives you this so
now we can use the same in the same
formula because we have worked out now
the formula for
for the slope and we see that the slope
K again is dy over D M but remember Y
and X are given by this formula
in other words Y is G of T and X is f of
T so we can use that to write DX is f
prime of T DT and dy is G prime of T DT
and so what you get here is G prime
divided by f prime of T DT and now it's
tempting to to just cancel cancel out
these two DTS and actually you can you
can you are allowed to do this under
some wild restrictions we are not going
to get too much into details but I'm
just giving you an intuitive derivation
of the formula but what I'm saying now
can actually be made rigorous and
precise and it took some you know it
took centuries to really work out all
the details and to really explain what
this DT really means we'll talk more
about this when we talk about
differentials of functions in two and
three variables and you will see why
this kind of calculation is legitimate
because the way it is now the key is
kind of a mysterious object and you
people never as people don't explain in
the book it's not really explain what
the G is and I'm not going to explain it
now I'll just I'll explain it later
because for now we just we just have to
sort of take it for granted the fact
that we are allowed to cancel them out
the only condition which needs to be
satisfied is that F prime is nonzero if
F prime is nonzero for a good reason
because if F prime is 0 e G value R in
this formula you're dividing by it so
you cannot allow divide by 0 so if F
prime is not you so this formula makes
sense as long as the prime is nonzero
and the formula again reads just like
more precisely we have to say at which
value of T but remember that's why I was
careful here when we talked about the
question I said what is the tangent line
to this curve at a given point x0 y0 and
f 0 y0 was the point which corresponds
to a particular value of the parameter
which I call t0 so to be absolutely
precise this is a formula for the slope
of that tangent line where both of the
derivatives are evaluated at T 0 ok any
questions why is it at T 0 because we
are calculating the slope at a given
point right and the point on a
parametric curve point is determined by
the value of the parameter so because
here I'm sort of writing all over the
place but here this is the answer to a
question which is written in the
opposite board where T 0 is introduced
you have to have to look at both alright
so let's see what do we want to do with
this okay let's let's look let's do an
example
as an example so find find tangent line
two to the parametric curve given by by
this equations at the point equal one so
this means that T 0 is 1 the instruments
T 0 which appears a Pearson is formula
in this exercise is one because well
here it is equal one my point is I'm
trying to use notation in the following
way that when I say T I kind of view it
as an independent variable it can take
any values when I talk about a specific
point then I want to say that key equals
equal to some specific value in a
general formula I don't want to say
which value it is 1 2 3 I don't want to
say it so that's why I use the notation
C 0 so T 0 just means the particular
value of C as opposed to a variable
itself it's a subtle difference so Q if
it's lost on you don't worry about so
much all right find the time to find the
equation of the tangent line the
equation of the tangent line in the case
of graph of a function is written here
now in the case of curves primary colors
the equation is going to be y equals I
look at I say this equation is always
like this and now K is equal to this so
I just substitute this K into the
formula so I get G prime of T 0 over F
prime of T 0 X minus x0 plus y 2 where X
0 and y 0 are the values of the function
to begin with so that's going to be F of
G 0 and that's going to be G of T 0 so
it's very straightforward exercise
because you own all you need to do is
just to calculate each of this number
will show up here so let's first
calculate X 0 and y 0 ok X 0 is going to
be the value of x when he is equal to 1
right it's just this is F and this is
this is G so what you need to do is you
need to calculate the value of this
function first X equal 1
that's logarithm at 1 and logarithm of 1
is 0 exactly very good
so now y 0 is you calculate 1 times e to
the 1 so e to the 1 is e and if you
don't remember what E is you should go
back and read you know that's one B it's
a it's a particular constant which is
defined by the property that the
derivative of this function e to the T
at T equals 0 is equal to 1 so it's a
debate of the natural logarithm so it's
practical numbers like 2.7 and it's like
it's like pi it's a very important to
universal constant so Ione purposely
chose this example so because you know
in homework you will you'll have to deal
with this confront like e and things
like that so you have to get you have to
remember them and get used to them ok so
it's a particular is a particul number
it's not a variable the particular
number which is equal to 1 I don't
remember exactly but I think some like 7
8 8 1 whatever oh maybe I shouldn't
write it because if it's not correct
then I don't make for myself all right
so ok so we found X 0 and y 0 that's
great and next we need to find the slope
so for that we need to find the
derivatives of this so f prime of T is 1
over T right and G prime of T so again
if you don't remember how to
differentiate logarithm you have to
remember because this is something this
is something from single variable
calculus and we are going to use this
result freely we are using everything
we've learned so far which means single
variable calculus in particular we have
to know the riveters of all these
functions and all the rules have to
do it just like this so G Prime you use
the derivative the product so that's
going to be e to the T plus T 2 T 2 G
right absolutely plus and now if you if
I want to value at T equals 0 at T 0
which is 1 I'm going to get 1 for this
one and I'm going to get 2 right and now
I need to calculate the ratio between
them so let me just write about so I
have to take the ratio of G prime over F
prime G prime is 2 e and it's 1 so
that's going to be 2 times 2 e then I
have X minus x0 which we found is 0 so
actually it's going to be 2 e times X
plus y 0 and y 0 we found to be e so
that's the answer that's the equation of
the tangent line okay so so next what
else can we learn about this amongst all
the lines there are special ones there
are ones which are vertical and the ones
which are horizontal so how to find out
when it's vertical or horizontal you
just look at the slope so the slope is
again at the tangent right so the slope
is 0 the slope is 0 if and only if the
tangent line is horizontal if the
tangent line tangent is horizontal
this we learned in single variable
calculus but we never talked about when
tangent line is vertical and there's
good reason for this because the tangent
line for a graph to a graph of a
function is never going to be vertical
you kind of you have to think about it a
little bit and then you'll see that it's
not possible so the tangent line can
only be horizontal but not vertical in
the case of a graphical function which
is our special case like this but in the
most general case it surely can be
vertical or horizontal one thing you
could switch x and y and when you switch
X and y what I mean is switching f of T
and G of T right we are allowed to do
that because x and y are now completely
on equal footing and so if you switch X
and y a vertical becomes horizontal and
vice versa so clearly vertical vertical
tangent lines will something will be
something which is will show up as well
so the way to see that then is it's
better to look at this formula at the at
the more general formula which you have
just found for the slope and so we see
that if G prime of T 0 is 0 it means
that the tangent is horizontal right I
would like to say that but the problem
is I have to make sure that this formula
is valid and the formula is valid if F
prime is nonzero so you have to have two
conditions satisfied G prime is 0 but F
prime of t0 is nonzero and this by this
I mean I mean the end that both
conditions are satisfied
once again G prime is 0 but F prime is
nonzero then it's presento and if you
want if you want understand when it's
vertical you just switch X and y so when
you switch X and y F starts playing role
of G and G starts playing the role of F
so which is without thinking just switch
them and you will get the condition for
the vertical one for the vertical
tangent line F prime is zero but G prime
is non zero zero that man is vertical
so so let's see let's see some some
example when tangent lines are vertical
or horizontal how to find out see the
problem is if both of them are 0 you're
kind of dividing 0 but over 0 and that's
really not well-defined so it really
depends on the situation it could be it
could be anything so it really depends
you have to study it in more detail but
if it's just one of them is 0 but the
other one is nonzero then you can say
for sure that it's vertical or
horizontal depending on which which one
is 0 and which one is nonzero so example
2 IX is T times T squared minus 3 and Y
is 3 T squared minus 3 I'm sorry 3 times
x squared minus y squared minus-- so
let's compute so this is a friend again
this is f of T and this is G of T so
what is the prime well we can write this
as T cubed minus 3t so that's going to
be 3 T squared minus T G prime this is
this is now 3 T squared minus 9 so
that's going to be what 60 right and to
find out when it's vertical when it's a
result all we have to find the values of
T for which one of these two functions
is 0 so f prime of T equals 0 means that
3 T squared minus
or in other words 3t squared is equal to
3 which is the same as T squared is
equal to 1 so that two solutions T equal
1 or equal negative 1 okay so for those
values F prime is 0 but to be able to
say conclusively whether the tangent is
vertical we also have to check the
values of the size of the other function
to do or more precisely the derivative
of the error function right so we have
to substitute these two values into the
other derivative so we get G prime 1 is
6 so nonzero good G prime of negative 1
is negative see it's nonzero again good
well good in the sense that we caught
the point or two points in this case at
which the tangent is vertical so what
are these points points where tangent
line tangent sometimes I'll just write
the word tangent just to make it shorter
it means tangent line is the same thing
tangent line is vertical are the points
for it's pointing to the value equal 1
which is the point if we put substitute
equal 1 we get what 1 minus 3 so which
is negative 2 right so negative 2 and y
intercept 1 we get 1 minus 3 is negative
2 times 3 negative 6 and the second one
with one key is equal to the negative 1
so if it is negative 1 we get negative 1
right negative 1 minus 3 times negative
1 which means plus 3 so that's 2 that's
2 and here we put negative doesn't
matter because we square so it's going
to be the same to an empty
okay so that's how you find and
horizontal for the horizontal one you
have to do the same but with G prime G
prime equal zero which means T equal
zero equals zero and then you substitute
here and you see that F prime negative
three which is nonzero so that means
great so that at this point we also get
a horizontal tangent line and then you
find that point in the same way I'm not
going to do this I think it's clear
simply substituting in in x and y
substitute the value T equals zero okay
any questions yes yes
right okay that's a good question
actually let me give you one example
kind of to to show you that it could be
anything
okay a very simple example oh yes I have
three P's and also for our worldwide
audience I hope you are being filmed so
the question is give an example example
when both F Prime and G prime are equal
to zero what does it mean geometrically
okay so so let's do this so I want to
find two functions which is a particular
value of a point value of the parameters
have zero derivatives okay and the
simplest function which has which could
have derivative zero it is squared not T
because T the derivative T is 1 so it's
a constant cannot be 0 right at T Square
already has derivative equal to 2 times
T and if T is 0 that's 0 so let's say
this is T squared T squared and let's
say that this one is also T squared so
in other words what I mean to say that X
is T squared and Y is equal to T squared
right so what does it look like actually
image is X is equal to Y so it looks
like a line right which is kind of
diagonal in other words the slope the
angle here is 45 degrees the slope is 1
right because it's a funny thing you say
this is T Square this is T squared which
means that X is equal to Y right it's
like well it's almost like we are
eliminating the parameter but there is a
catch and the catch is we have to be
careful what are the ranges of the
variables something which I mentioned at
the end of last lecture because the
point is that for
both different negative values of T this
is going to be positive or more
precisely non-negative could be zero or
positive and like right here so that's
why on purpose I didn't draw the entire
line but only half of it so the image
which represents this parametric curve
is this half a line and actually then
you have to be careful what are the
ranges I didn't say anything about the
ranges if you take just the positive
ranges positive values of T is going to
be this and if you take negative values
of T is going to be the same thing so
it's actually if you don't say anything
about the range of T and kind of
implicitly say that it's from negative
infinity to positive infinity then it's
going to be this curve twice you kind of
come from you you you come from here and
then you come back if you say say for
example T from zero to infinity then
you're going to to get just discover a
line once okay so now suppose we so we
see very clearly graphically we see very
clearly what the object is makes it much
more much more easy to analyze
but now let's compute the derivative so
f prime of T is 2 T and G prime of T is
2 T right so at T equals 0
so there's a point equal 0 which is here
this is the point T equal 0 so when K is
equal to 0 both are 0 and the so the
slope as I said you cannot use this
formula for the slope because you're
dividing 0 by 0 but then of course the
question what is a slope in this case
well the slope is 1 right it's sort of
half a line so you may feel a little bit
uneasy because there is no other end but
you can still think about about the
slope of this right of the tangent line
in this case the tangent is going to be
parallel it's going to coincide with the
curve itself at least on this part right
and so the the slope is going to be just
the slope of this curve which is which
is 1 so you have sort of 0 by 0 but what
happens is that the derivative is 0 just
at this point but outside of this point
is nonzero so you can approximate the
ratio of 2
by the ratio or by the ratio of these
two functions and then take T to zero
because you know what you see what you
get to see is 2t over 2t and that's one
so in this particular case even though
you cannot apply the formula you know
that the answer is 1 but to show you yet
you are sort of really on a slippery
slope no pun intended
let's suppose let's suppose you put
let's suppose you put put something like
five okay let's - let's put two okay so
then you have this and so instead is
going to be more sharper curve sharper
line so a steeper line okay
so then Y is going to be two times X and
this is y equal X and this is y equal to
x with so for this one it slope is two
right by the derivative now are going to
be 2t and for T so you see both again
are zero right and so and you cannot use
the formula because zero over zero is
undeterred in determined and the point
is that even even even though it's again
zero by zero
but now the answer is not one but the
answer is two so that's what illustrates
that zero over zero could actually be
anything so in these two examples it's
one or two that's right that's right so
so that's right so to repeat the saying
that so it looks like we're just
applying the load petals rule which I
hope you remember what what tells it all
is which is to say that we are actually
looking at these two derivatives so now
we're going to be 2t over 40 and we
don't substitute equal zero immediately
in the numerator and the denominator but
we look at this function for t very
close to zero and we see what is it well
if T is non zero this makes perfect
sense it's going to be two over four
which is one half right except I'm I'm
taking the ratio in the opposite order
right sorry so we have to do FG prime
over F prime so it's four
/ - and that's going to be so for over -
and that's - so the ratio itself is well
defined even though if we do it if we
substitute - too quickly too soon then
it will be zero for zero but and then I
I don't want to go too much off on a
tangent here okay so I'll just sorry I
couldn't do this but I just I will let
you play with other examples for example
try to to do say square here but you put
t cube or something like this and see
what will happen it's really it's a very
nice example to consider but let's go
back to our curve so so now we know
about tangent lines when they are
vertical when they are horizontal what
else do we need to know well in the
single variable calculus we also talked
about second derivatives so you see the
point is that first derivative
good music alright but we're not here to
listen to music so it should avoid this
now at least not during the during the
lecture the first derivative is the
slope dy over DX and it tells you the
general direction of the function if the
slope is positive it means that Y is
increasing as X is increasing if if the
slope is negative it means that Y is
decreasing as X is increasing but and
oftentimes we call this the first order
approximation first order now you can
see why it's first order because it's
the first derivative the first order
approximation and oftentimes it's also
good to look at the sort of second order
approximation in other words to look at
the second derivative and the second
derivative is d squared Y over DX
squared or if you will DDX of dy/dx and
that's something which tells us if you
think of this as the velocity this is
acceleration it tells you the trend in
other words whether phase function is
increasing but is it increasing faster
as time goes by or is increasing more
slowly and the way this is this can be
seen geometrically is from the concavity
of the function if the function is like
this it means that the second derivative
is positive we will call this concave
upward that's what it's called in the
book I'm actually I'm not sure I maybe I
would call it concave downward but
that's a terminology so we'll stick to
it so this means concave upward upward
and it means that this is greater than
zero and if it's negative
it's it concave downward so it looks
like this so it gives you more
qualitative features of the of the curve
so even if you cannot draw the curve
right away it tells you by calculating
these derivatives you will know the
ranges of parameters for which the curve
looks like this approximately or like
this and there is a simple formula for
this in terms of F and G but I will let
you read about it in the book it's very
straightforward so I don't want to waste
time in it okay so that's that's the
other thing you need to know in addition
to the first derivative which gives you
the equation of the tangent line you can
also have the second derivative tell you
about the qualitative behavior of a
graph kind of a second order
approximation okay so what are we going
to do next are we going to do next is we
are going to use to talk about other
features or parameter curves and so far
we talked about so far we talked about
differentiation right so this
information about the tangent lines it
has to do with the derivatives and now
we'll talk by the integrals and
integrals are not about the local
behavior of the function like the
derivatives which tell us about a kind
of behavior of the graph on a very small
scale but integrals are about the global
behavior about averaging of the function
in other words about areas various areas
which are related to the graphs so
so here again we use as a sort of a
guiding principle guiding principle the
material that we learned in single
variable calculus and then we generalize
it to the more general parameter curves
namely we have to remember the formula
about the area under the graph of a
function so again I go back to the
single variable situation and I'm I'm
drawing you I'm drawing graph of a
function f of X and suppose on the X
line on the x-axis I'm mark two points a
and B okay and I look at the graph above
it let's assume that the graph in this
range from A to B that the graph is
entirely above the axis like like shown
and not below or not like going from
upper half to the plane to the lower
half plane let's assume for simplicity
is like this then we can ask what is the
area which is enclosed between the
x-axis the graph and the vertical lines
which are X equal a and XO kody one of
the triumphs so to speak of the single
variable calculus was a formula for this
which I actually kind of alluded towards
the end of my first lecture and which is
that this is what's called the integral
so in the area under the graph given by
the integral f of X DX okay and this we
can write as G of X and D to a now let's
just say G of B minus G of a where G is
the antiderivative of X
under the river of F so in other words
finding areas involves integration and
this formula shows that integration is
really the procedure which is which is
inverse or opposite to differentiation
because to find the integral you have to
know differentiate this function but
rather find a function whose derivative
F is that's what we call NT derivative
so in other words find G such that G
prime you tell finding antiderivative so
that was a story and now we would like
to generalize it because again with you
now this graph as a special parameter
curve how special the curve given by by
that parameterization right and now we
want to generalize it to the case
over-over parametric curve for which the
functions F and G are arbitrary
functions I mean the small F and G not
the big ones which are you here okay so
so the question becomes suppose we are
given a primary curve same kind of same
for parametric curve
suppose you have a parametric curve now
in a well bad by drawing because looks
exactly the same is that one so let me
make it that's the only one I can draw I
don't know just a natural kind of a
natural impossible okay so let's say and
again we we pick some interval here from
A to B and we can ask what is what is
this area so in other words now again F
with F where of T and Y is G of T and
let's say T is between some alpha and
beta so that a the this is X right and
this is y so I call them a and B so what
are they if he is from alpha to beta it
means that a is half of alpha and and B
is G of beta but somehow a and B are not
so important now what is important is
the values of the parameter T goes from
alpha to the beta so now we again you
have to when this kind of question is
that you have to be careful to make sure
that that the graph is indeed above the
above the x-axis and after I write down
the formula we'll discuss briefly about
what happens if it's not the case okay
now the question is to generalize now
this formula and so the M is actually
very easy because another way to look at
this formula is to say that it is given
by the formula if there is a way to
rewrite this formula we just have to
remember that f of X is actually Y so
another way to think about its formulas
is just say that the integral of Y DX
from A to B
and so we can now this make sense even
for parametric curves because x and y
still make sense so the area between
let's just say area of this of this
figure is going to be equal to the
integral again of Y DX but the problem
is that the x and y are given by this as
functions of a variable key so at first
it looks a little bit like a nuisance
but then you have to remember that
actually something we've learned before
when we study the integrals we often
times so that it was beneficial to
substitute a different variable instead
of X oftentimes in single very vocal
tools to actually technically evaluate
the integral to find the antiderivative
it was oftentimes useful to make
substitution and to say that X is some
function of T of some other variable so
let's just call that other variable T
and say that X is equal to f of T and
then we had a formula for this for
calculating the integral in terms of
this new variable T and what was this
formula actually it's very easy to write
it if we just remember how to compute
the differential DX so the main formula
here DX is equal to F prime of T DT
that's what DX is yes
yes you're right thank you
very good yeah I should develop some
system of prizes for people who find it
yeah that's the point so now I'll think
about you should be on the lookout
because you know I can make mistakes
sometimes on purpose and sometimes just
because no one is perfect you know so in
this case I just made a mistake so thank
you for correcting it so this is this is
the formal we're going to use so the X
is just F prime of T DT and Y is G of T
okay so substituting the variable T here
simply means using the old substitution
formula which would give us the integral
from alpha to beta Q P F prime of T
that's already a very nice formula which
now does not involve X and y but only
these two functions F and G and so it
becomes very nice formula because just
as as long as you as soon as you know
what the G of T is and F of T years you
can calculate the area okay so it's the
same formula but just generalize to this
more general context of parametric
curves now let's talk about the subtle
point which is what to do if in fact the
picture is not like this but it also
involves some part of the lower half
plane below the x-axis because it
happens right so this is something we
learned even in single variable calculus
and the point here is that you see the
point is that when you write when you
write this formula if you really think
of Y DX if it lies above the x-axis it
means that Y is always positive so you
actually get a positive answer which is
the area but if Y is negative then
you're going to get a negative answer so
this already suggests to you that for
example if you were to consider this
case where actually it is below the axis
what you're going to get is not this
area but this area with negative sign so
minus negative the area will be equal to
this integral I want to write it like
this because it includes both this case
where you can just write y equals f of X
and also includes this case where you
simply substitute this so in other words
area is is equal to negative of this the
integral is negative and area is always
positive so to make to get extract the
area out of the integral you have to
mark you have to put an extra negative
sign so the integral is going to be
negative to begin with you put another
negative sign the answer be positive so
if the graph is entirely below the
x-axis you just put a negative sign so
then of course there is a mixed case
where it could go like this so in this
case let's call this area a 1 and let's
call this area a 2 so what you are going
to get is the difference between the two
in other words the part which lies above
the access is going to be to contribute
with positive sign and the part which
lies below the x-axis we can take this
negative sign so a 1 minus a 2 will be
the integral of Y dear
so whenever you fall below the x-axis
you are going to get negative things and
so you don't get the area you get
negative area minus the area and that's
why you get this format so that's the
most general formula which is the same
thing will be true here it's not going
to be the area but rather a 1 minus a 2
in general where a 1 and a 2 mean the
same thing is here a 1 is the part which
is above the axis in a 2 is the part of
the low this okay this clear yes the
graph doubles on itself
ok oh yeah yeah yeah yeah ok
that's like a don't don't stay scenario
but so if the question is right so you
know this is not like this is not the
worst case you're right so this there is
a worse situation when it goes like this
right and see the before when we studied
graphs of functions this could not
happen could not possibly have happened
because for each value of x we would
have just one value of y but now because
we didn't parametric curves anything is
possible
right so in this case the point the
question so what's going to happen is
which is ok so that here there is a
different there is a different issue in
my formula which I wrote here I said T
goes from alpha to beta and so I put the
limits like this and I'm assuming that
alpha is less than beta so smaller value
of T corresponds to smaller value of x
and bigger value of T corresponds to
bigger value of x right so then you get
this formula what could happen is that
so in this picture a curve is traversed
like this but if the curve were
traversing like this you would get the
integral in which you will the lower
limit will be bigger than the higher
limit and we make sense of that by
saying that you switch the limits but
you put
- sign so that's another way by which
you could introduce the negative sign in
in this integrals namely in the case
when the left endpoint corresponds to a
larger value of T so if alpha is less
than that this is alpha is less than
beta so also goes to a which is less
than being vacant goes to B but the
other possibility would be another
possibility could be that you could have
exactly the same picture right but but
now let's say I could change the
parameterization for example I could
just substitute instead of T I put
negative T so that what was before say a
would be would correspond to value of
alpha which is bigger than value of beta
all right so this is axis T so then you
will end up with an integral where this
form will still be correct will be
integral from alpha to beta but when you
when you start calculating it you will
say you will have integral let's say not
from 0 to 1 but from 1 to 0 and here you
have a you know G of T E and then F
prime so the rule is that this is the
same as the integral from 0 to 1 but
with negative sign
see so so you have to be careful that
first of all the thing is above the axis
or below the axis this kind of stuff
which I talked about before right the
second side of the e is that you have to
be careful as to in what direction the
curve is going with respect to the
permit ization when T is increasing are
you going from left to right or you're
going to from right to left okay so now
to go back to this the interesting
things that happened here is that say
one let's say it goes like this so then
on this segment it will go from left to
right but then from this segment will go
from right to left and then will be
again will go from left to right the
fact that actually there are three
different parts is not so important
because the point is that in setting up
the integral we will be using not a and
B for general parameter codes but alpha
and beta in other words will be stick we
will have to specify from the beginning
which branch out of these three branches
we are talking about are we talking
about the area under this one or the
area under this one or the area under
this one because the formula really
explicitly involves the endpoints alpha
and beta with respect to T not with
respect to not respect to a and B so
usually we would just pick a particular
branch and we'll just say in other words
we will be saying that this is this is T
equal alpha and this is C equal beta and
this segment will correspond to some
other alpha beta and this will
correspond to some other object of
course in principle you could say what
is the meaning of the integral when T
will go from this value to this value
and this also is very easy to figure out
but at this point we're kind of losing
the geometric meaning of this right so
we have a clean geometric meaning when
we are talking about a branch which is
kind of a which doesn't double out on
itself like I said you know but which
just you have a single branch over the
segment in the X in the X line in
principle you could also do you could
also give an interpretation to the more
general integrals but you kind of lose
the interpret geometric interpretation
so we will not do that so we will
consider much the ones which have a more
clear meaning like this okay let's
answer your question okay
I need other questions
all right so that's the integrals and
the last thing I want to talk about is
[Music]
these are our clients
so the other thing which is very
interesting is to find the length of a
segment of the over of a parametric
curve okay
so only less than ten minutes and you'll
be free to go
alright so that's just a finish line
okay now and I will be done all of the
stuff is really it's not so difficult if
you see in each case there is a formula
so what I'm trying to do here today is
to kind of give you intuitive
understanding of the formula kind of
introduced the formula for you and
explain why it's true but once you know
the formula you basically just have to
substitute if you look at the homework
exercise most of them just about
substituting there are a few subtle
points and one of the subtle points is
the way when you do the integral what
exactly you calculate calculating are
you calculate so you there are subtle
points about the sign which like the
ones which I mentioned here but other
than that it's fairly it's very
straightforward and likewise what is
also straightforward is the arc length
and so so the question really is what is
the length say you have a primary curve
what is the length of the of the part of
this curve between these two points now
of course you could say what do I mean
by the length and for this you can just
think of the same analogy which I
explained last time which is a think of
your curve as it's wire okay so the
curve is is curvy when you when you look
at it on the plane in other words you
know when I make it like this is curvy
but at the end of the day I can just
take it and stretch it out and measure
it right so that's the length and of
course the point is when I stretch it
out it should not be stretchable you
know it should be stored alike because
otherwise I can stretch it as far as I
want right so it has to be when I
straight when I say I stretch it I mean
just kind of making it into a straight
line segment but I should assume that
I'm not displacing anything that it sort
of has the same it's not it's length
with something which is well-defined
which is not does not depend on me the
way I hold it
right so that's exactly this so you just
kind of take it and and put like this
and and then of course it's clear what
it's what it's lying clear is you can
measure it that's what we mean by our
clients so in other word even though it
is curvy it has there is a notion of the
length even if even for curved objects
and of course a great example of this is
the arc length of a circle a circle is
curvy right but we know what the length
is and what is it that's right that
seems to be disagreement
yes 2pi that's right so so the length of
the circle is 2 pi and that's and that's
how we sorry circumference 2 PI R that's
right I'm thinking of a circle radius 1
but if it has register okay I think now
we are in agreement right circle of
radius R the length of the 2 PI R and in
fact so this is a very important there
is a very important constant showing up
which is called pi and we'll talk about
it have you seen the movie pi by the way
now you should see it is cool kind of
book it's one of those movies with a
crazy mathematician you know but but
it's a cool it's a cool movie all right
so settle down now
pi is the this universal constant which
actually is defined by this property
that 2 pi R is the circum circumference
of a circle of radius R so this is just
a good example to show you that even
though the circle is curvy but there is
some length it has a length and of
course the way you show you measure this
length is you can think of a circle as
being formed by ropes which you kind of
open up and stretch and ok you can
measure it and you can see that it's 2
pi R but even for more general
parametric curves we have the notion of
the length and we would like to
calculate it by using this functions F
and G and there is actually very nice
formula which involves integration for
this and it's and the point is that the
formula is also very easy to derive and
the reason why it's easy to derive is
because we model everything on straight
lines and you know today when I start
the lecture I said the simplest curves
are lines and too low to really
understand various characteristics of
complicated curves we have to understand
them first four lines and then we kind
of extrapolate generalize to the more
general curves to the most general
parametric curves so if we have if our
curve were in fact a line or a line
segment we would be able to find the
length very easily by using the
Pythagoras theorem
by using the categories theorem so this
would be Delta AB and this would be
Delta Y and the length would be the
square root of Delta x squared plus
Delta Y squared right so now we have a
much more complete career but as we
discussed earlier no matter how
complicate the curve is if it is smooth
or differentiable it can actually be
approximated on a very small scale it
can always be approximated by a line
okay
so small scale so what it means is that
we should okay if we just try to
approximate the whole thing by line it's
not a very good approximation but we
could break it into segments like this
and now each of those segments each of
the small segments actually does look
like a an interval a segment of the line
and so for each of them you can have
Delta X and Delta Y so you know so you
would it will look something like this
or maybe on this side it will look like
this and then you would have so this is
just one one of the segments which I
blow up I assume on it right and so I
have Delta X and Delta Y so then I have
the the length of this line segment
which is now going to be very very close
to the actual length and so I'm going to
approximate the entire length by the sum
of the lengths of those line segments
it's kind of like a snake-like picture
like you know and on each of the small
segments I have an interval and so the
end of the day what I'm going to get is
a sum is the integral which looked like
this DX quiz so it's going to be kind of
like Delta x squared again plus Delta Y
squared but on the small one in the
limit when when those little pieces
become smaller and smaller it's going to
be DX squared plus dy squared and then
what I'm going to do I'm going to put
this
and this will be from alpha to beta and
then I can take this under the integral
and so what the result is going to be is
that I'm going to have DX DT squared
plus dy DP squared DT so that's the
answer that's the formula for the arc
length of the curve between the points
alpha and beta equal alpha and Keiko
beta and I have now given you a kind of
very informal intuitive understanding of
why this formula holds it's essentially
comes from the Pythagoras theorem so
this was just a trick I wanted to
rewrite this this isn't in a nicer way I
just put this and I put this under okay
so we're out of time so see on Thursday